fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines delegated methods
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines into delegated methods
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines delegated methods into delegated methods
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines methods that use blocks into methods that use blocks
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines trivial methods
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines methods with arguments
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines methods with locals
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines methods with literals
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines methods with local jumps
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines methods with returns
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines somewhat complicated methods
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines methods that throw exceptions
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines methods into methods that throw and catch exceptions
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines methods that throw and catch exceptions
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines methods that throw exceptions into methods that catch them
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines methods that use blocks
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines into methods that use blocks
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines methods defined in a new class
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner refuses to inline non-self methods
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines getters on self (hell yes)
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines setters on self
fails:Rubinius::Inliner::SimpleSelfCallInliner inlines in a nestable manner
